# Git - Reset/Revert back to a previous commit

## Revert
### Explanation
- Reverting back to a commit basically takes the contents of a previous commit, and soft-checking out that commit in your current repository
    - Effectively, in your repository's history 
        + the latest commit will be you removing all changes made past that specified commit and going back to the previous version

### Operational Steps/Flow
1. Use 'git reflog' to find the commit hash/ID you want to revert to
    - Explanation
        + git reflog - aka git 'reference log' - is basically git log but for individually hashes to changes made
    ```bash
    git reflog
    ```

2. Revert to the target commit
    ```bash
    git revert [commit-hash]
    ```

3. You may potentially encounter problems, typically if edits are made to files (i.e. modified)
    - Check the revert status
        ```bash
        git status
        ```
    - Locate the difference/changes
        + Plan if you want to change, or keep the file(s) as-is
        ```bash
        git diff
        ```
    - (Optional) To abort a revert
        ```bash
        git revert --abort
        ```
    - (Optional) To keep the file at its latest version and not revert back to the old contents
        ```bash
        git revert --continue
        ```

4. When the fixes are made (if any)
    - Continue the revert
        ```bash
        git revert --continue
        ```

## Resetting
### Explanation
- Resetting back to a commit basically takes the contents of a previous commit, and removing every branch in the history after the specified commit
    + The repository has returned to a previous version and effectively, in your repository's history, the latest commit will be the specified commit

### Operational Steps/Flow
1. Use 'git reflog' to find the commit hash/ID you want to revert to
    - Explanation
        + git reflog - aka git 'reference log' - is basically git log but for individually hashes to changes made
    ```bash
    git reflog
    ```

2. Revert to the target commit
    ```bash
    git reset [commit-hash]
    ```

3. (Optional) If you want to undo a commit and all the changes made after the commit
    + Parse and attach the '--hard' flag
    ```bash
    git reset --hard [commit-hash]
    ```

## Documentations
### Differences
- Differences between 'git reset' and 'git revert'
    + Unlike the git reset command, the git revert command creates a new commit for the reverted changes. The commit where we reverted from will not be deleted.
    - git reset will undo changes up to the state of the specified commit ID. 
        - For example, reverting to the second commit ID will undo changes and leave the state of the file as the state of the second commit.
    - git revert will undo changes up to the state before the specified commit ID. 
        - For example, reverting to the second commit ID will undo changes and leave the state of the file as the state of the commit that comes before the second commit – the first commit
    - git reset is a good option when you realize that the changes being made to a particular local branch should be somewhere else. 
        + You can reset and move to the desired branch without losing your file changes.
    - git revert is a good option for reverting changes pushed to a remote repository. 
        + Since this command creates a new commit, you can safely get rid of your mistakes without rearranging the commit history for everyone else

- Differences between 'git reset' and 'git reset --hard'
    + A soft git reset does not revert staged or working tree files back to a previous state, while the hard git reset does. 
    + Neither the git reset hard nor soft commands impact untracked files.

## Wiki

## Resources 

## References
+ [FreeCodeCamp - ](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/git-reverting-to-previous-commit-how-to-revert-to-last-commit/)
+ [TheServerSide - Blog - Git reset hard vs. soft: What's the difference?](https://www.theserverside.com/blog/Coffee-Talk-Java-News-Stories-and-Opinions/Git-reset-hard-vs-soft-Whats-the-difference)

## Remarks